# On Gender and innovation

*I'm copying this over from my notebook that I scribbled out one evening.  It is not edited yet.  Please forgive the possible lack of clarity in my initial thoughts.*

There's nothing overly special about my educational upbringing.  I come from a small rust belt high school, went to a college that is often viewed as a safety for the brand name small liberal arts colleges, went to a state school for graduate studies and now work at a wonderful, but small defense contractor.  One thing that I think is a bit unique and lucky, however, is my membership in situations that do not have the same poor gender ratios of a typical tech worker.  In college, despite being the single member of my 100% male graduating class of physics majors, my department did have women mentors, and I consistently had women in my small classes.  Not many, but not zero.  In graduate school, despite all the chronic problems of diversity in hard sciences, my department was remarkably gender balanced in the student body.  (The faculty was another matter.)  An internship I took while in graduate school saw me as the only white male in my cohort in an organization that was run by and overwhelmingly staffed by women.  None of this is to say anything great about me, but it is simply to point out that it is part of my formative experience to expect that women's voices are a part of the conversation and that if I'm true to myself, I notice when they are not.

So, dear reader, you are now expecting me to tell you about my recent experience where there were no women.  And I will, but I think that  given you expect it, it's important for me to talk about innovation.


The DoD is about innovation these days.  We see it in many discussions about the threat from near peer competitors (e.g. China) as well as in discussions about contracting and acquisitions.  Leaders within the community want to know how we can tap typically un-accessed parts of the tech community, particularly silicon valley startups, to provide new ideas at low cost so that the US maintains a strategic edge.  But the silicon valley question is important when we talk about who is doing the innovation.  It goes without saying that silicon valley is heavily male centric.  Despite the few leaders who "lean in", the overwhelming majority of the workforce is male and white or of Asian decent.  This has implications on the products that are said to be innovative.  

* Facebook suggests baby products to people with miscarriage
* period apps that have no idea about menstruation cycles
* openness to derogatory comments on Twitter (some references)

The people and groups that are doing the innovation will create innovation back by their original outlook on the world.  In fact this is remarkably similar to the idea of AI bias in the research community (citation).  

My personal story is then about a bunch of people brought together by a segment of the DoD to perform innovation. The details of who and where are not overly important, and its been long enough to separate some of the personal sting because I don't think any of the organizers actively intended the gender ratio but its the system we live in.  So there I was to generate innovative systems for DoD at a table with 5 men and 1 woman.  At the table to my right was 6 men.  At the table behind was 6 men.  At the 4th table was 6 men.  It turned out that there was a fair amount of diversity in terms of career and experience.  We had multiple scientists/engineers, educational designers, film makers, a pastor, a person from the health industry, and more.  Not as much as there should be to look like America itself, but some.  The most glaring representational difference was in terms of gender.

Did id directly affect the innovation work we were performing at the event?  Who knows.  Its impossible to prove that one way or the other through our small numbers and short time.  But we do know that over the long term it has some effect.  Groups with diversity produce more and function better (citation).  I do know that I could tell in real time that our assumptions about the world were awful similar.  When we constructed "simulated" user stories our ideas for background ran on the same ground.  what ideas are not even thought of, let alone left on the floor because of our similarities.

So what should we do?  Invite more women and other members of disadvantaged populations.  Well sure, that's easy for me to say, I wasn't in charge of sending out invitations.  I didn't know the breakdown until I flew 1000 miles and spent a night in a hotel.  Would things have changed if I had asked before hand?  What should I risk of my career or my company's business model to speak up?

Well of course I should.  Neither "manels" or "guyshops" are the way forward for our defense enterprise.  How hard would have been for me to ask what the gender breakdown was when I replied to the invite?  Is that harder than writing "he/him" on my nametag?  How hard would it be for me to ask #natsecgirlsquad for a participant to come with me?  Not very.  When our National Security establishment tells us that competition with China is the defining challenge of our lifetimes, "not very" should stand in our way of development of new techniques and products for the DoD.
